Electro and fintech,
robo-advisory insurance tech,
and related disciplines would be woefully
incomplete without talking
about Millennials.
In part because the financial
advisory insurances and other fintech
industries are so keenly aware of how
important the Millennials will be.
In part because they're
going to be inheriting so
much wealth, and because of their
very fast adoption of technology.
In the words, of one fintech founder,
a major fintech founder,
they're going to disrupt the industry.
They're going to target clients and
in particular,
they're going to target Millennials.
I asked this founder, are they
going to pursue a bionic approach,
a fully bionic approach,
and the answer was no.
And in fact, this particular
robo-advisor founder wants all
advisors non-robo-oriented dead.
It's a strong statement,
how's it going to do it?
He's going to wait until Millennials
inherit the wealth having
captured their hearts and
minds early as customers.
Millennials are those individuals born
generally in the late 1970s through
the mid-1990s.
There are various definitions,
some describe them as being born in 77
through 1995, but they're roughly 20
to 40 years old give or take a year.
And of course, there are many
gradations of those Millennials.
And of course, we're also abstracting
fairly broad when talk about them.
But as many know very well, they represent
large portions of the US population.
Almost 85 million members of the US
population as of 2015 that's 25%
of the US population, would be
self-defined as Millennials globally.
It's even a larger proportion,
just about 40 percent of the global adult
population in 2015 we would
classify as Millennial.
Nielsen's, the well-known
consumer research organization,
describe Millennials as diverse,
expressive, and optimistic.
They have a number of differentiations
within their own demographic
including with income.
The medium income was $25,000 for
those under 28 years old,
and for those above about $50,000 just
about twice the younger Millennial level.
25% were married in 2015 that contrasts
strongly with previous
generations like Baby Boomers,
who saw 42% of their demographic
married to the same age.
They're also more ethnically and racially
diverse than previous generations.
Interestingly enough,
they are not poorer on an asset level
compared to previous generations.
Nielsen reports a greater percentage of
double millionaires are Millennials 14.7%
than Gen X and
Young Boomers 12.9% in 11.8% respectively.
This has clear implications for
the statement that I mentioned about
capturing the hearts of minds
of Millennials and waiting.
The wealth distribution of
Millennials is broad and
diverse and to be distinguished from
the wealth of other generations.
The Nielsen data stratify those who
are Millennials, which they defined as
those under 35, Generation X 35 to 44,
Boomers on the young side,
45 to 54, older Baby Boomers essentially
traditionally retirement age anyway,
55 to 64, and then the Silent Generation,
sometimes known as
the Greatest Generation 65 or above.
Millennials are in the blue,
what we see is that a larger
proportion of Millennial
millionaires exists as of that
date compared to Generation X or
the Young Baby Boomers.
However, and there's a much
larger proportion of Millennials
who have under $25,000 in total wealth,
about 24%.
In other words, they are more diverse and
are more diverse especially
in the extremes.
To say it one more way,
they represent at the same age
lower levels of wealth except
in the millionaire class
as we look at the broader
general wealth distribution.
In addition, Millennials have
what we might characterize as
a skeptical view toward financial advice.
They are generally characterized as
having optimism about their future.
Yet half Millennials think
there will be no money for
them from government subsistence programs
like Social Security when they retire.
Only 6% of Millennials expect
to receive Social Security
payments at levels available to
current retirees in a recent survey.
According to US Trust,
about two-thirds of millennial see their
investment decisions as a way to express
impact in a way that goes beyond
purely that which is financial.
In other words, environmental social
political values may be expressed,
in by way of impact investing or
ESG investing using their assets.
Meanwhile, in 2015 a survey held
that one-third of advisers are not
likely to represent an impact investment.
In other words, there seems to be
a mismatch between traditional advisory
practices in the hearts and
the minds of Millennials.
That having been said in other words,
70% advisers are reporting
inquiries about impact.
Additional recent data tell us that
about 70% of Millennials here,
defined as those born in 81
through 96 belying this slight
disagreement about the range that
covers Millennial birth cohorts.
Felt confident and well prepared
to handle the money that they
will either earn or
inherit from their families.
That distinguishes themselves dramatically
from previous generations at the same age.
For example, 73% of Generation Xers,
86% of Boomers, and almost 90% for
the Silent Generation felt confident
to handle their families money.
However, 80% of Millennials
own a smartphone.
90% Millennials check their smartphones
within the first 15 minutes of waking up.
What are they doing?
They're checking social networks.
They're also extremely entrepreneurial,
more than half in the reported surveys,
and that comes from US Trust,
Deloitte, and the Federal Reserve,
have started a business plan or
their own businesses.
Just under 30% report being
self-employed in some way.
That having been said, some recent
research from the Federal Reserve Bank of
St. Louis in its income stability unit,
has found that 60% of US Millennials
have zero exposure to public equities.
That may be inherently contrasted
with the fact that they may own
their own businesses or
have entrepreneurial aspirations.
When they do hold public market equities,
they hold only about $7,600
which is significantly
lower than the Gen X reported
value at the same age.
Millennial households had
an average net worth of $90,000
in 2016 compared to $130,000 for
Generation X in 2001, in other words,
once again at the same age.
The Federal Reserve data found
that 81% of Millennial workers
don't believe Social Security
will be there for them.
And in fact more than half expect nothing,
this is from the Pew Research Center.
More than that more Millennials
believe in UFOs than believe that
Social Security will persist.
And yet they are optimistic about
their own personal future and
their desire and
ability to matter in the world at large.
However, trust is an issue, which for
those of us who live to the great
financial crisis, and market shocks that
were potentially viewed by Millennials,
is not that much of a surprise.
A characteristic of Millennials is
a perennial low level of trust,
not in themselves, but in others,
the Pew Research Center has
been tracking this for decades.
What we see when we look at
the Boomer Generation versus
the Silent Generation and
Gen X is, as time has progressed,
and as they have been at younger
ages more exposed to dramatic
volatility in markets,
trust levels have gone down.
What you see here is from a question
asking, generally speaking,
would you say that most people can
be trusted or that you can't be too
careful in dealing with people asked
of respondents in those categories?
Recently, 40% of Boomers respond
responded that generally speaking
most people can be trusted, 37% of
the Silent Generation, 31% of Gen X.
However, less than 20% of the Millennial
respondents responded that
people can be trusted.
However, while they may be skeptical and
less trusting about others,
and although they may generally
have lower levels of wealth and
income currently compared
to previous generations,
they are nonetheless the most optimistic
generation about their financial futures.
The research from the Pew Center we
mentioned a second ago revealed that
only 32% of Millennials said they
currently have enough to live now.
That compares and contrasts really
strongly with Gen X, Boomers, and
the Silent Generation respondents
approximately 40% of with,
45% of which, and 54% of which responded
that they currently have enough
to live the kind of life that they want.
However, while they don't learn
have enough now they expect to in
the future 53% of Millennials
responded in the positive,
whereas 15% of Boomers
said the same thing.
Now, of course, there are age and cohort
effects here, but it is undeniable that
Millennials are at a base level
optimistic about their own futures.
They're optimistic about themselves,
they're optimistic about what the future
may hold, and they're optimistic
about their place in history, and
their ability and their opportunity
to matter in the world at large.
So then why does fintech hold promise for
Millennial customers?
Well, in part it's because of their
adoption of technology which has increased
over time, it differentiates itself
from adoption by other cohorts.
The Federal Reserve Board of
Governors continued their research
in a recent survey
focusing on consumers and
mobile financial services,
highlighting the use of mobile banking and
mobile payments in an amplified context,
so to speak.
The younger Millennial generation here
listed as 18 to 29 was the greatest
adopter of both mobile banking and
mobile payments in the survey period.
And of course, as we move along
the age distribution from younger
older in any given period covered
by the survey, which range from
2011 to 2015, we see that we
have decreasing adoption and
use of mobile banking and mobile payments.
Let's first treat the time pattern,
let's take for
example the Millennial
young generation 18 to 29.
We see in 2011, 45% of that cohort use
mobile banking, 20% use mobile payments.
By the end of 2015,
it had gone to almost 70% for
mobile banking and
about 30% for mobile payments.
That's an increase of 50% for
mobile payments and
about 40% for mobile banking.
As we go from the 18 to 29-year-old
cohort, to the 45 to 59 or
the 60 plus cohort, we see a small
fraction of the same level of adoption.
It is not the case that adoption
of financial technology by
way of mobile apps is
a Millennial-only phenomenon, or
the growth rate can be only
attributed to Millennials, but
it's predominantly a Millennial thrust.
For example,
if we look at the 60 plus cohort in 2011,
only 5% reported using mobile banking
apps and 5% reported using mobile apps.
By 2015, that had gone to almost 20% for
mobile banking and
about 13% for mobile payments,
a strong contrast with
the younger cohorts.
So Millennials are reported by researchers
to be optimistic, to be diverse,
to be interested in how they fit
into the world and their impact.
They are viewed to be
optimistic about their futures,
although they may as a matter of fact,
have less financial
capability currently and
they've adopted technology.
As a side question, but one that turns
out to be fairly important we might ask,
where do the time variation come from?
Sociologists certainly will continue
to research the matter, but
we do have some knowledge from our
understanding of the implications and
the impact of market
volatility on behavior.
That's the area of risk aversion or
risk tolerance.
And it turns out that with respect
to the millennial cohort, but
also more generally market volatility
has probably changed behavior, and
we can see it in the numbers.